Dollar-Cost Averaging (DCA): What It Is, How It Works, and Example

How Many People Still Rely on Pensions in Retirement? More Than You May Think

How Much Do Americans Have in the Bank? A Look at Median Balances by Age and More

Retirement Planning for People Without Kids: Preparing for Long-Term Care and Estate Decisions

You Just Came Into Some Cash: Answer These Two Questions Before You Invest It Or Pay Off Debt

How Will I Use This in Real Life?

Dollar-Cost Averaging (DCA): What It Is, How It Works, and Example

Adam Hayes, Ph.D., CFA, is a financial writer with 15+ years Wall Street experience as a derivatives trader. Besides his extensive derivative trading expertise, Adam is an expert in economics and behavioral finance. Adam received his master's in economics from The New School for Social Research and his Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in sociology. He is a CFA charterholder as well as holding FINRA Series 7, 55 & 63 licenses. He currently researches and teaches economic sociology and the social studies of finance at the University of Lucerne in Switzerland.Adam's new book, "Irrational Together: The Social Forces That Invisibly Shape Our Economic Behavior" (University of Chicago Press) is a must-read at the intersection of behavioral economics and sociology that reshapes how we think about the social underpinnings of our financial choices.

Cierra Murry is an expert in banking, credit cards, investing, loans, mortgages, and real estate. She is a banking consultant, loan signing agent, and arbitrator with more than 15 years of experience in financial analysis, underwriting, loan documentation, loan review, banking compliance, and credit risk management.

Betsy began her career in international finance and it has since grown into a comprehensive approach to journalism as she's been able to tap into that experience along with her time spent in academia and professional services.

Dollar-cost averaging (DCA) is a strategy that can make it easier to deal with uncertain markets by making purchases automatic.

Dollar-cost averaging can reduce the overall impact of price volatility and lower the average cost per share.

By buying regularly in up and down markets, investors buy more shares at lower prices and fewer shares at higher prices.

DCA aims to prevent a poorly timed lump-sum investment at a potentially higher price.

Novice and experienced investors can both benefit from DCA.

Get personalized, AI-powered answers built on 27+ years of trusted expertise.

What Is Dollar-Cost Averaging (DCA)?

Investing can be challenging. Even experienced investors who try to time the market can come up short. Dollar-cost averaging (DCA) can remove the uncertainty of market timing by adhering to a fixed investment schedule. This strategy also supports an investor’s effort to invest regularly.

DCA involves investing the same amount of money in a target security at regular intervals over a certain period, regardless of price. Using DCA may lower an investor's average cost per share and reduce the impact of volatility on their portfolios. In effect, this strategy eliminates the effort required when attempting to time the market to buy at the best prices.

Dollar-cost averaging is meant to help investors manage risk instead of increasing profitability.

How Dollar-Cost Averaging (DCA) Works

DCA is a simple tool that an investor can use to save and build wealth over the long term. It's also a way for an investor to ignore short-term volatility in the broader markets. A prime example of long-term DCA is its use in 401(k) plans, in which employees invest regularly regardless of the price of the investment.

With a 401(k) plan, employees can choose how much they want to contribute as well as the investments offered by the plan in which to invest. Investments are made automatically every pay period. Depending on the markets, employees may see a larger or smaller number of securities added to their accounts.

DCA can also be used outside of 401(k) plans. For instance, investors can use DCA to buy mutual or index fund shares regularly, whether in another tax-advantaged account like a traditional IRA or a taxable brokerage account.

DCA is one of the best strategies for beginning investors looking to trade exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Many dividend reinvestment plans (DRIPs) let investors use DCA by making purchases regularly.

DCA is also known as the constant dollar plan.

It can lower the average amount you spend on investments.

It reinforces the practice of investing regularly to build wealth over time.

It’s automatic and can take concerns about when to invest out of your hands.

It removes the pitfalls of market timing, such as buying only when prices have already risen.

It can ensure that you’re already in the market and ready to buy when events send prices higher.

It takes emotion out of your investing and prevents you from potentially damaging your portfolio’s returns.

Any investor can use DCA as an investment strategy. DCA may be especially useful to new investors who don’t have the experience or expertise to judge the most opportune moments to buy. It can also be a reliable strategy for long-term investors who are committed to investing regularly but don't have the time or inclination to watch the market and time their orders.

DCA isn’t for everyone. It isn’t necessarily appropriate for those investing when prices are trending steadily in one direction or the other. Consider your outlook for an investment, plus the broader market, when deciding to use DCA.

It’s important to note that DCA works well when you buy an investment over a specific period of time when the price fluctuates up and down. If the price rises continuously, those using DCA end up buying fewer shares. If it declines continuously, they may continue buying when they should be on the sidelines.

DCA can’t protect investors against the risk of declining market prices. However, like the outlook of many long-term investors, this strategy assumes that prices (though they may drop at times) will ultimately rise.

Using this strategy to buy an individual stock without researching a company’s details could prove detrimental as well. That’s because an investor might continue to buy more stock when they would otherwise stop buying or exit the position.

For less-informed investors, the strategy is far less risky when used to buy index funds rather than individual stocks.

Investors who use a DCA strategy will generally lower their cost basis in an investment over time. The lower cost basis will lead to less of a loss on investments that decline in price and generate greater gains on investments that increase in price.

Jordan works at ABC Corp. and has a 401(k) plan. They receive a paycheck of $1,000 every two weeks. Jordan decides to allocate 10% or $100 of their pay to their employer’s plan every pay period.

They contribute 50% of their contribution to a large-cap mutual fund and the other half to an S&P 500 index fund. Every two weeks, 10%, or $100, of Jordan's pretax pay will buy $50 worth of each of these two funds, regardless of the fund’s price.

The table below shows half of Jordan's $100 contributions that went to the S&P 500 index fund over 10 pay periods. Throughout 10 paychecks, Joe invested a total of $500, or $50 per week. The price of the fund increased and decreased over that time.

Jordan spent $500 over the 10 pay periods and bought 47.71 shares, paying an average price of $10.48 ($500 ÷ 47.71).

Jordan bought different share amounts as the index fund increased and decreased in value due to market fluctuations.

The Results if Jordan Spent One Lump Sum

Instead of using DCA, let's say that Jordan spent their $500 at one time in pay period #4. They paid $11 per share.

That would have resulted in a purchase of 45.45 shares ($500 ÷ $11).

There was no way for Jordan to know the best time to buy. By using DCA, however, they were able to take advantage of several price drops despite the fact that the share price increased to over $11. They ended up with more shares (47.71) at a lower average price ($10.48).

How Will I Use This in Real Life?

If you have a stock you’d like to invest in but aren’t clear on when the best time to buy is, DCA can help. By following a simple routine of automatic stock purchases at regular intervals, DCA lets you invest consistently without needing to analyze the market or wait for a dip (which can be difficult to predict). This is particularly helpful if you’re new to investing.

You can use DCA to purchase individual shares and ETFs or to make regular contributions to your IRA. The strategy is to choose a fixed amount you’re comfortable with and stick to it, regardless of how the market is performing. This helps average out the cost of your investments over time while simultaneously removing the emotional aspects of investing, allowing you to build your portfolio steadily.

Is Dollar-Cost Averaging a Good Idea?

It can be. When dollar-cost averaging, you invest the same amount at regular intervals and hopefully lower your average purchase price by doing so. You'll already be in the market when prices fall and rise. For instance, you’ll have exposure to dips when they happen and don’t have to try to time them. By investing a fixed amount regularly, you will end up buying more shares when the price is lower than when it's higher.

The key advantage of DCA is that it reduces the negative effects of investor psychology and market timing on a portfolio. By committing to a DCA approach, investors avoid the risk that they'll make counterproductive decisions out of greed or fear, such as buying more when prices are rising or panic selling when prices decline. Instead, DCA forces investors to focus on contributing a set amount of money each period while ignoring the price of the target security.

How Often Should You Invest With DCA?

With regard to actually using this strategy, how often you employ it may depend on your investment horizon, outlook on the market, and experience with investing. If your outlook is for a market in flux that will eventually rise, then you might wish to try it. If a persistent bear market is at work, then it wouldn’t be a smart strategy to use. If you’re planning to use it for long-term investing and wonder what interval for buying makes sense, consider applying some of every paycheck to the regular purchases.

Dollar-cost averaging is a straightforward way of investing that reduces the emotional stress of trying to invest at the right time. By sticking to a fixed investment schedule and amount, you'll naturally buy more shares when the price is low vs. high.

DCA may not be a perfect investment strategy, as it doesn’t protect against market risk. However, it allows investors to stick with regular investing, build up a portfolio over time, and decrease the anxiety of trying to time the market.

Get personalized, AI-powered answers built on 27+ years of trusted expertise.

Investopedia requires writers to use primary sources to support their work. These include white papers, government data, original reporting, and interviews with industry experts. We also reference original research from other reputable publishers where appropriate. You can learn more about the standards we follow in producing accurate, unbiased content in our

Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. “The Pros and Cons of Dollar-Cost Averaging.”

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “401(k) Plan.”

The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which Investopedia receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where listings appear. Investopedia does not include all offers available in the marketplace.

The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which Investopedia receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where listings appear. Investopedia does not include all offers available in the marketplace.

Sell Explained: Processes, Tax Implications, and Examples

Making Sense of Relative Return: Key Concepts and Comparisons

Upper Management: What it is, How it Works

Best Investing Courses for May 2026

Recession-Proof Investments: How They Work and Examples

Capital Recovery: Definition and Key Strategies for Success

A Comprehensive Guide to Principal Investing

Earnings Beat or Just Buzz? How To Read Between the Lines

Takedown: What it Means, How it Works, Shelf Offerings

Ticker Talk: Your Earnings Season Companion

How To Adjust Your Portfolio During Earnings Season

How Companies Frame Earnings—and What To Watch For

The Rule of 72: Definition, Usefulness, and How to Use It

Understanding Drawdowns: Definition, Risks & Recovery Time

Overcome Investment Fears and Build Your Portfolio

How To Listen to Earnings Calls Like an Investor

is part of the People Inc. publishing family.