Investment: How and Where to Invest

How Many People Still Rely on Pensions in Retirement? More Than You May Think

How Much Do Americans Have in the Bank? A Look at Median Balances by Age and More

Retirement Planning for People Without Kids: Preparing for Long-Term Care and Estate Decisions

You Just Came Into Some Cash: Answer These Two Questions Before You Invest It Or Pay Off Debt

Investment: How and Where to Invest

Adam Hayes, Ph.D., CFA, is a financial writer with 15+ years Wall Street experience as a derivatives trader. Besides his extensive derivative trading expertise, Adam is an expert in economics and behavioral finance. Adam received his master's in economics from The New School for Social Research and his Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in sociology. He is a CFA charterholder as well as holding FINRA Series 7, 55 & 63 licenses. He currently researches and teaches economic sociology and the social studies of finance at the University of Lucerne in Switzerland.Adam's new book, "Irrational Together: The Social Forces That Invisibly Shape Our Economic Behavior" (University of Chicago Press) is a must-read at the intersection of behavioral economics and sociology that reshapes how we think about the social underpinnings of our financial choices.

Charlene Rhinehart is a CPA , CFE, chair of an Illinois CPA Society committee, and has a degree in accounting and finance from DePaul University.

Vikki Velasquez is a researcher and writer who has managed, coordinated, and directed various community and nonprofit organizations. She has conducted in-depth research on social and economic issues and has also revised and edited educational materials for the Greater Richmond area.

An investment is a purchase of stocks, bonds, real estate, or other assets to acquire capital gains, dividend distributions, or interest payments.

An investment involves using capital in the present to increase an asset's value over time.

Investments may include bonds, stocks, real estate, or alternative investments.

Investments can be diversified to reduce risk, though this may reduce the amount of earning potential.

In business contexts, investments are financial; however, consider how some people spend time to make higher incomes in the future (i.e., invest in a college education).

Get personalized, AI-powered answers built on 27+ years of trusted expertise.

An investment is an asset or property acquired to generate income or gain appreciation. Appreciation is the increase in the value of an asset over time. It requires the outlay of a resource today, like time, effort, and money, for a greater payoff in the future or for generating a profit. Investing typically requires giving up things like money, time, or effort with the expectation of receiving a larger financial benefit in the future. Because of this, all investments involve some level of risk, since returns are never guaranteed.

Diversifying your investments can spread out risk while smoothing returns over time by ensuring that your assets respond differently to the same economic events.

Stocks or equities: A stock share is a piece of ownership of a public or private company. The investor may be entitled to dividend distributions generated from the company's net profit. The stock's value can also grow and be sold for capital gains. The two primary types of stocks to invest in are common and preferred.

Bonds or fixed-income securities: An investment that often demands an upfront investment and pays recurring interest over time, called a coupon payment. At maturity, the investor receives the capital invested in the bond. Like debt, bond investments are a mechanism for governments and companies to raise money.

Index funds or mutual funds: Index and mutual funds aggregate specific investments to craft one investment vehicle. An investor can buy shares of a single mutual fund that owns shares of multiple companies. Mutual funds are actively managed, while index funds are often passively managed. Actively-managed funds use investment professionals to outperform an index or try to beat a specific benchmark. In contrast, passively-managed funds attempt to imitate a benchmark by mirroring the stocks listed on the index.

Real estate: Real estate investments are investments in physical, tangible spaces that can be utilized. Land can be built on, office buildings can be occupied, warehouses can store inventory, and residential properties can house families. Real estate investments may encompass acquiring sites, developing sites for specific uses, or purchasing ready-to-occupy operating sites.

Commodities: Raw materials such as agriculture, energy, or metals are commodities. Investors can invest in tangible commodities, like owning a bar of gold, or choose alternative investment products that represent digital ownership, such as a gold ETF. Oil and gas are examples of commodities.

Cryptocurrency: A blockchain-based currency used to transact or hold digital value. Cryptocurrency developers or companies can issue coins or tokens that may increase in value. These tokens can also be used in transactions. Cryptocurrency can be staked on a blockchain where investors agree to lock their tokens on a network to help validate transactions. These investors are rewarded with additional tokens.

Collectibles: Collecting or buying collectibles involves acquiring rare items in anticipation of those items increasing in value and demand. From sports memorabilia to comic books, these physical items often require substantial physical preservation, considering that older items usually carry higher value.

Research: Investors should understand the vehicles they are putting their money into. Whether it is a single share of a well-established company or a risky alternative investment endeavor, investors should do their homework.

Establish a personal spending plan: Before investing, individuals should ensure they have enough capital to pay monthly expenses and have already built up an emergency fund.

Understand liquidity restrictions: Some investments are less liquid than others and may be more difficult to sell. An investment, like a certificate of deposit (CD), may be locked for a certain period and not be easily liquidated.

Tax implications: Investors should understand the cost of short-term and long-term capital gains tax rates.

Determine Risk: Investing incurs risk. Investors may end up with less money than they started with. Investors uncomfortable with this idea can (1) reduce their investment only to amounts they are comfortable losing or (2) explore ways to mitigate risk through diversification.

Consult an adviser: Many financial professionals provide guidance and help investors access financial instruments, accounts, and online platforms.

Diversification mixes a variety of investments, such as stocks, bonds, or real estate, within a portfolio to reduce portfolio risk.

Calculating Return on Investment (ROI)

The primary way to gauge the success of an investment is to calculate the return on investment (ROI). ROI is measured as:

ROI = (Current Value of Investment - Original Value of Investment) ÷ Original Value of Investment

ROI allows different investments across different industries to be compared. For example, consider two investments: a $1,000 investment in stock that increased to $1,100 over the past year, or a $150,000 investment in real estate now worth $160,000.

Stock ROI = ($1,100 - $1,000) ÷ $1,000 = $100 ÷ $1,000 = 10%

Real Estate ROI = ($160,000 - $150,000) ÷ $150,000 = $10,000 ÷ $150,000 = 6.67%

Though the real estate investment has increased by $10,000, many would claim that the stock investment has outperformed the real estate investment because every dollar invested in the stock gained more than that invested in real estate.

Investment return and risk commonly have a positive correlation. If an investment carries high risk, it should be accompanied by higher returns. When making investment decisions, investors must gauge their risk appetite. Some may be willing to risk the loss of principle in exchange for the chance at greater profits. Alternatively, extremely risk-averse investors seek only the safest vehicles. Individuals closer to retirement commonly choose safe investments.

Because the goal of investing is future growth or income, there is always a certain level of risk. An investment may lose value over time, a company may go bankrupt, or interest rate fluctuations may affect bonds or real estate investments. Investors can reduce portfolio risk with a broad range of investments. By holding different products or securities, an investor may not lose as much money as they are not fully exposed to any one way.

How Much Will I Make If I Invest $100 Per Month?

It depends on what you invest in and market conditions. If you expect (and get) a 5% return over 30 years of investing $100 per month, you'd end up with about $198,300.

When you invest, you put your money into assets that can generate returns over time. You generally buy something of value, such as stocks or bonds, to earn income, increase its value, or both.Returns usually come through income, like dividends, interest, or rent, and appreciation. When the asset’s price rises, you can sell it for a profit. Because investment values can rise or fall, successful investing generally requires research, patience, and a long-term outlook.

What Should Beginners Invest in?

Some of the simplest and most inexpensive ways to begin investing are in a retirement plan such as a 401(k) through your employer, an IRA, or an exchange-traded fund (ETF). ETFs generally have low starting amounts, such as $1, and have very low fees.

An investment is an asset purchased as part of a plan to put money to work today to obtain more money in the future. It is also the primary way people save for major purchases or retirement. Using stocks, bonds, real estate, or commodities, individuals can create a diversified portfolio.

Get personalized, AI-powered answers built on 27+ years of trusted expertise.

Investopedia requires writers to use primary sources to support their work. These include white papers, government data, original reporting, and interviews with industry experts. We also reference original research from other reputable publishers where appropriate. You can learn more about the standards we follow in producing accurate, unbiased content in our

Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. "Stocks: Types."

Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. "Bonds: Overview."

Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. "Mutual Funds: Types."

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "Certificates of Deposit (CDs)."

Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. "Asset Allocation and Diversification."

Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. "Risk."

The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which Investopedia receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where listings appear. Investopedia does not include all offers available in the marketplace.

The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which Investopedia receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where listings appear. Investopedia does not include all offers available in the marketplace.

Making Sense of Relative Return: Key Concepts and Comparisons

Sell Explained: Processes, Tax Implications, and Examples

A Comprehensive Guide to Principal Investing

Capital Recovery: Definition and Key Strategies for Success

Dollar-Cost Averaging (DCA): What It Is, How It Works, and Example

Best Investing Courses for May 2026

Recession-Proof Investments: How They Work and Examples

Earnings Beat or Just Buzz? How To Read Between the Lines

Upper Management: What it is, How it Works

Ticker Talk: Your Earnings Season Companion

How To Adjust Your Portfolio During Earnings Season

How Companies Frame Earnings—and What To Watch For

Takedown: What it Means, How it Works, Shelf Offerings

Understanding Drawdowns: Definition, Risks & Recovery Time

The Rule of 72: Definition, Usefulness, and How to Use It

How To Listen to Earnings Calls Like an Investor

is part of the People Inc. publishing family.