Financial Portfolio: What It Is and How to Create and Manage One

How Many People Still Rely on Pensions in Retirement? More Than You May Think

How Much Do Americans Have in the Bank? A Look at Median Balances by Age and More

Retirement Planning for People Without Kids: Preparing for Long-Term Care and Estate Decisions

You Just Came Into Some Cash: Answer These Two Questions Before You Invest It Or Pay Off Debt

Financial Portfolio: What It Is and How to Create and Manage One

Carla Tardi is a technical editor and digital content producer with 25+ years of experience at top-tier investment banks and money-management firms.

Thomas J. Brock is a CFA and CPA with more than 20 years of experience in various areas including investing, insurance portfolio management, finance and accounting, personal investment and financial planning advice, and development of educational materials about life insurance and annuities.

Ryan Eichler holds a B.S.B.A with a concentration in Finance from Boston University. He has held positions in, and has deep experience with, expense auditing, personal finance, real estate, as well as fact checking & editing.

A financial portfolio is a basket made up of positions in various investments that work together to serve an investor’s goals.

A portfolio is a collection of financial investments such as stocks, bonds, commodities, cash, and cash equivalents including closed-end funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs).

People generally believe that stocks, bonds, and cash create the core of a portfolio. This is often the case but it doesn't have to be the rule. A portfolio can contain a wide range of assets including real estate, art, and private investments.

You might choose to hold and manage your portfolio yourself or you may allow a money manager, financial advisor, or another finance professional to manage your portfolio for you.

A portfolio is a collection of financial investments such as stocks, bonds, commodities, cash, and cash equivalents as well as their fund counterparts.Stocks and bonds are generally considered to be a portfolio’s core building blocks but you can grow a portfolio with many types of assets including real estate, gold, paintings, and other art collectibles.Diversification is a key concept in portfolio management.A person’s tolerance for risk, their investment objectives, and their time horizon are all critical factors when assembling and adjusting an investment portfolio.Portfolio management is an important financial skill for active investing.

Get personalized, AI-powered answers built on 27+ years of trusted expertise.

One of the key concepts in portfolio management is the wisdom of diversification: not putting all your eggs in one basket. Diversification tries to reduce risk by allocating investments among various financial instruments, industries, and other categories. It aims to maximize returns by investing in different areas that would each react differently to the same event.

There are many ways to diversify. How you choose to do it is up to you. Your goals for the future, your appetite for risk, and your personality are all key factors in deciding how to build your portfolio.

All portfolios should contain some degree of diversification, regardless of your portfolio’s asset mix. They should reflect the investor’s tolerance for risk, return objectives, time horizon, and other pertinent constraints. These can include tax position, liquidity needs, legal situations, and unique circumstances.

"Portfolio” comes from the Latin word folium. It means to “carry leaves” as in papers. Stock and bond certificates were once issued only in paper form.

Think of an investment portfolio as a pie that's been divided into pieces of varying wedge-shaped sizes, each piece representing a different asset class and type of investment.

Investors aim to construct a well-diversified portfolio to achieve a risk-return portfolio allocation that's appropriate for their level of risk tolerance. Stocks, bonds, and cash are generally viewed as a portfolio’s core building blocks but you can grow a portfolio with many types of assets including real estate, gold stocks, various types of bonds, paintings, and other art collectibles.

This sample portfolio allocation is for an investor with a low tolerance for risk. A conservative strategy generally tries to protect a portfolio’s value by investing in lower-risk securities. You’ll see in this example that a full 50% is allocated to bonds that might contain high-grade corporates and government bonds including municipals (munis).

The 20% stock allocation could be made up of blue-chip or large-cap equities and 30% of short-term investments might include cash, certificates of deposit (CDs), and high-yield savings accounts.

Most investment professionals agree that diversification is a key component for reaching long-range financial goals while minimizing risk although it doesn't guarantee against loss.

There can be as many types of portfolios and portfolio strategies as there are investors and money managers. You might also choose to have multiple portfolios whose contents could reflect a different strategy or investment scenario structured for a different need.

The hybrid portfolio approach diversifies across asset classes. Building a hybrid portfolio requires taking positions in stocks as well as bonds, commodities, real estate, and even art. A hybrid portfolio generally entails relatively fixed proportions of stocks, bonds, and alternative investments. This is beneficial because stocks, bonds, and alternatives have historically exhibited less-than-perfect correlations with one another.

You expect that the stock, bond, or another financial asset will earn a return, grow in value over time, or both when you use a portfolio for investment purposes. A portfolio investment may be either strategic where you buy financial assets with the intention of holding onto those assets for a long time or tactical where you actively buy and sell the asset hoping to achieve short-term gains.

Aggressive Equities-focused Portfolio

The underlying assets in an aggressive portfolio generally assume great risks in search of great returns. Aggressive investors seek companies that are in the early stages of their growth and have a unique value proposition. Most of them aren't yet common household names.

Defensive Equities-focused Portfolio

A defensive portfolio would tend to focus on consumer staples that are impervious to downturns. Defensive stocks do well in bad times as well as in good times. Companies that make products that are essential to everyday life will survive no matter how bad the economy is at a given time.

Income-focused Equities Portfolio

This type of portfolio makes money from dividend-paying stocks or other types of distributions to stakeholders. Some of the stocks in the income portfolio could also fit in the defensive portfolio but they're selected primarily for their high yields in this case. An income portfolio should generate positive cash flow. Real estate investment trusts (REITs) are an example of an income-producing investment.

Speculative Equities-focused Portfolio

A speculative portfolio is best for investors who have a high tolerance for risk. Speculative plays could include initial public offerings (IPOs) or stocks that are rumored to be takeover targets. Technology or healthcare firms in the process of developing a single breakthrough product would also fall into this category.

Impact of Risk Tolerance on Portfolio Allocations

A financial advisor can create a generic portfolio model for an individual but an investor’s risk tolerance should significantly reflect the portfolio’s content.

Time Horizon and Portfolio Allocation

Investors should also consider how long they have to invest when they're building a portfolio. Investors should generally move toward a conservative asset allocation as their goal date approaches to protect the portfolio’s earnings up to that point. A conservative investor might favor a portfolio with large-cap value stocks, broad-based market index funds, investment-grade bonds, and a position in liquid, high-grade cash equivalents.

Take an investor who's saving for retirement and plans to leave the workforce in five years. They might want to invest a larger portion of the portfolio in more conservative assets such as bonds and cash to help protect what has already been saved even if they're comfortable investing in stocks and riskier securities.

An individual who's just entering the workforce might want to invest their entire portfolio in stocks because they have decades to invest and the ability to ride out some of the market’s short-term volatility.

How Do You Create a Financial Portfolio?

Building an investment portfolio requires more effort than the passive, index-investing approach. You must first identify your goals, risk tolerance, and time horizon then research and select stocks or other investments that fit within those parameters. Regular monitoring and updating are often required along with entry and exit points for each position.Rebalancing requires selling some holdings and buying more of others so your portfolio’s asset allocation matches your strategy, risk tolerance, and desired level of returns most of the time.Defining and building a portfolio can increase your investing confidence and give you control over your finances despite the extra effort required.

What Does a Good Portfolio Look Like?

A good portfolio will depend on your investment style, goals, risk tolerance, and time horizon. A good degree of diversification is generally recommended regardless of the portfolio type so you're not holding all your eggs in one basket.

How Do You Measure a Portfolio’s Risk?

A portfolio’s standard deviation of returns or variance is often used as a proxy of overall portfolio risk. The standard deviation calculation isn't merely a weighted average of the individual assets’ standard deviations. It must also account for the co-variance among the different holdings.The standard deviation calculation for a two-asset portfolio is:σp= (w12σ12 + w22σ22 + 2w1w2Cov1,2)1/2

A portfolio is the cornerstone of investing in the markets. It's composed of the various positions in stocks, bonds, and other assets held and is viewed as one cohesive unit. The portfolio components must therefore work together to serve the investor’s financial goals, constrained by their risk tolerance and time horizon.

Portfolios can be constructed to achieve various strategies, from index replication to income generation to capital preservation. Diversification is seen as a good way to reduce risk regardless of the strategy without sacrificing the portfolio’s expected return.

The comments, opinions, and analyses expressed on Investopedia are for informational purposes only. Read our warranty and liability disclaimer for more info.

Get personalized, AI-powered answers built on 27+ years of trusted expertise.

Investopedia requires writers to use primary sources to support their work. These include white papers, government data, original reporting, and interviews with industry experts. We also reference original research from other reputable publishers where appropriate. You can learn more about the standards we follow in producing accurate, unbiased content in our

Perry J. Kaufman. “Trading Systems and Methods,” Pages 681–733. Wiley Trading Series, 2019.

Merriam-Webster Dictionary. “Portfolio.”

The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which Investopedia receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where listings appear. Investopedia does not include all offers available in the marketplace.

The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which Investopedia receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where listings appear. Investopedia does not include all offers available in the marketplace.

What Diversification Really Means for Your Portfolio

Exploring International Portfolios: Key Benefits and Risks

DIY Investing Basics: Tools, Techniques, and Potential Risks

7 Ways AI Can Revolutionize Investment Strategy

Underweight: What it Means, How it Works, Example

Top 4 Long-Term Investments in Warren Buffett's Portfolio

Why Growth Investments Are Crucial in Retirement After 70

6 Essential Strategies to Protect Your Investments from a Market Crash

Effective Strategies for Asset Allocation in Your Portfolio

Understanding Commingling in Investment Funds

Managing Currency Exchange Exposure in Your Portfolio

The Optimal Number of Stocks for Portfolio Diversification

Covariance in Investing: Reducing Portfolio Risk and Maximizing Returns

Betterment vs. Merrill Guided Investing: Which Should You Choose?

How Sector Rotation Can Enhance Your Investment Strategy

Betterment vs. E*TRADE Core Portfolios: Which Is Best for You?

is part of the People Inc. publishing family.